Add RFC: Add notion of protocol (#45)
obsproject/rfcs: text/0045-add-notion-of-protocol.md

# Summary

> - Add notion of service protocol in libobs and OBS Studio

Reviewer: I wonder if either of these would be clearer:
* Define supported protocols for services in libobs and OBS Studio
* Teach libobs and OBS Studio about supported protocols for services

Or something like that.

Author: I made some changes.

> - Outputs for streaming are registered with their compatible protocol and codecs

Reviewer: protocol -> protocols
?

> - Outputs for streaming are registered with their compatible protocol and codecs

Reviewer: Should probably disambiguate "their" by saying "one or more".

- Only codecs compatible with the output and the service are shown

> - Audio encoder can be choosen if various compatible

Reviewer: choosen -> chosen

> - Audio encoder can be choosen if various compatible

Reviewer: Is the user meant to choose the audio encoder (an implementation) or the audio codec (MP3, AAC, Opus, etc.)?

Author: - In simple mode: codec
- In advanced mode: encoder (an implementation)

Author: Try to add more explanation.

- Will be extended with RFC 39

# Motivation

> Create a better management of outputs, encoders and services with an approach focused on protocols.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a better management of outputs, encoders, and services with an approach focused on protocols.
```

# Design

## Outputs API
Only outputs with the `OBS_OUTPUT_SERVICE` flag are concerned.

Adding to `obs_output_info`:
- `const char *protocols`: protocols separated with a semi-colon (ex: `"RTMP;RTMPS"`), required to register the output.

> - `const char *protocols_prefixes`: URL protocols prefixes separated with a semi-colon `"rtmp://;rtmps://"`, optional.

Reviewer: Why not `protocols_schemes` and only list the scheme without the `://`?
* https://www.iana.org/assignments/uri-schemes/uri-schemes.xhtml
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier#Syntax

I'm not saying outright to make this change now. I'm just inviting some discussion on this point.

Author: I require the `://` to avoid:
- matching with links (without schemes) like `rtmp.example.com`.
- adding it each time that a "auto-detection" is done based on it.

I may need to explain it in the RFC.

Reviewer: This is probably fine as-is.

  - Only one prefix per protocol in `protocols`.
  - Those prefixes should be in the same order as `protocols`.
  - Meant to be used for protocol auto-detection.
  - While registering if present, the number of prefix shall be less or equal to the number of protocols.

> Asside the getter for protocol attribute, adding to the API those functions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aside from the getter for protocol attribute, adding to the API these functions:
```

> Asside the getter for protocol attribute, adding to the API those functions:

Reviewer: What getter(s) for protocol attributes? Are these covered in this RFC? If so, mention the relevant section or link to it. If not, should they be covered in this RFC?

Author: Added all getters, rather than using "aside" and make the reader guess.

- `bool obs_output_is_protocol_registered(const char *protocol)`: return true if an output with the protocol is registered.
- `const char *obs_output_get_prefix_protocol(const char *prefix)`: return the protocol bound to the prefix.
- `bool obs_enum_output_service_types(const char *protocol, size_t idx, const char **id)`: enumerate all outputs types compatible with the given protocol.
- `bool obs_enum_output_protocols_prefixes(size_t idx, const char **prefix)`: enumerate all registered URL prefixes.
- `bool obs_enum_output_protocols(size_t idx, const char **prefix)`: enumerate all registered protocol.

### About protocols

> RTMP and RTMPS will on be considered compatible only with H264 and AAC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RTMP and RTMPS will only be compatible with H264 and AAC.
```

> HLS will have no prefix set and not "auto-detectable".

Reviewer: Is there any other scheme used with HLS other than HTTP/HTTPS?

Author: HLS (HTTP Live Streaming) relies on HTTP(S) so no.

Reviewer: Is there a reason to not explicitly mark the protocol for HLS as "http;https" then? I'm not sure what "not auto-detectable" means in this context.

Author: WHIP also use HTTP/HTTPS, other protocols could rely on HTTP/HTTPS.

Edit: Example from the WHIP PR https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1070835/213199106-ea26d24f-d9f0-4c02-bfd7-72840e3989ab.png

Author: > I'm not sure what "not auto-detectable" means in this context.

In code or even in the JSON Schema, we can use the prefix to determine the protocol which is useful for things like "Custom…".

Edit: We can't do that for HLS or WHIP.

Edit 2: I will change the wording.

> HLS, SRT and RIST are codec agnostic since they use MPEG/TS container but require some set up depending on the codec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HLS, SRT, and RIST are codec agnostic since they use MPEG/TS container but require some set up depending on the codec.
```

> FTL will be considered compatible only with H264 and opus because of the deprecation of the protocol in OBS Studio.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FTL will only be compatible with H264 and Opus because of the deprecation of the protocol in OBS Studio.
```

## Services API

> Since a streaming service may not accept all the codec usable by a protocol, adding a way to set supported codecs is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since a streaming service may not accept all the codecs usable by a protocol, adding a way to set supported codecs is required.
```

Adding to `obs_service_info`:

> - `const char *(*get_protocols)(void *data)`: return the protocol used by the service. It will allow multi-protocol services in the future.

Reviewer: > It will allow multi-protocol services in the future.

I'm confused if this is referring to this RFC or if it's referring to RFC 39.

Author: Replaced "it" by "RFC 39".

- `const char **(*get_supported_video_codecs)(void *data)`: video codecs supported by the service. Optional, fallback to protocol supported codecs if not set.
- `const char **(*get_supported_audio_codecs)(void *data)`: audio codecs supported by the service. Optional, fallback to protocol supported codecs if not set.

### Services and information

> Dependending on the protocol, service should provide various information (e.g. server URL, stream key, username, password).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the protocol, the service should provide various types of connection details (e.g., server URL, stream key, username, password).
```

> So as it si now, `get_key` can provide a stream id (SRT) or an encryption passphrase (RIST) rather than a stream key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, `get_key` can provide a stream id (SRT) or an encryption passphrase (RIST) rather than a stream key.
```

> Rather than adding a getter for each possible info. A getter where we can chooose which info we want should be considered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rather than adding a getter for each possible type of information, a getter where we can choose which type of information we want should be implemented.
```

> Adding to Services API:

Reviewer: Does "Services API" mean `obs_service_info`?

- `const char *(*get_connect_info)(uint32_t type, void *data)` where `type` is an integer indicating which info we want and return `NULL` if it doesn't have it.

> - `bool (*can_try_to_connect)(void *data)`, since protocols and services do not always require the same informations. This function allows the service to return if it can connect. Returns true if not implemented.

Reviewer: Under what conditions would this return `true`? Under what conditions would it return `false`?

Author: I developed  the explanation.

> - Each type will be define by a macro and a even number, odd number will be reserved for future third-party protocol.

Reviewer: Is `type` here referring to `uint32_t type` above in `get_connect_info` and "List of types:" below?

Author: Added more explanation and changed wording.

- `obs_service_get_url`, `obs_service_get_key`, `obs_service_get_username` and `obs_service_get_password` will be deprecated in favor of `obs_service_get_info`.

List of types:
```c
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_SERVER_URL 0
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_STREAM_KEY 2
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_USERNAME 4 
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_PASSWORD 6
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_STREAM_ID 8
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_ENCRYPT_PASSPHRASE 10
```

> So if one day, we have a protocol that don't use a server URL, this scenario can be covered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the future, if we want to support a protocol that doesn't use a server URL, this scenario is covered by this design.
```

### About `rtmp-services`

This plugin will:

> - for `rtmp_common` only accept H264 or HEVC depending on the protocol, AAC and opus for FTL protocol.

Reviewer: To clarify, `rtmp_common` already currently covers OBS_OUTPUT_SERVICE outputs using `rtmp_output` and `ftl_output`, correct? The name `rtmp_common` doesn't really mean "this only uses RTMP".

Reviewer: Resolved with the text changing to:
> In `rtmp_common`, services must at least support H264 as video codec and AAC or Opus as audio codec. This is a limitation required by the simple output mode.

- for `rtmp_custom` it will depends on the auto-detected protocol.

## UI

### Audio encoders

> If the service/output is compatible with various audio encoders, the user should be able to choose in the UI which one.

Reviewer: Same question as earlier about "encoders" vs. "codecs".

Author: I tried to change the wording, feel free to review it again.

For AAC in simple mode, the will have only one AAC option.
In advanced mode the user could choose between various AAC implementation.

### Settings loading order

Service settings need to be loaded first and output ones afterward to show only compatible encoder.

> ### About service JSON file

Reviewer: The services.json file isn't part of the UI. This section probably doesn't need to be in the UI section.

> - A field `"protocol"` will be added for HLS/FTL services, other protocol can be detected through prefixes, further changes will be done in RFC 39.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For `services` objects, a `"protocol"` field will be added. This will be used to indicate the protocol for services that use HLS or FTL. Other protocols can be detected through prefixes. Further changes will be done in RFC 39.
```

>   - Services still mono-protocol, RTMP+RTMPS combo when the field is not set is the only exception.

Reviewer: Not sure what this is describing.

>   - RTMP services with custom code and HTTP(S) URLs will have the protocol enforced to RTMP.

Reviewer: I think this specifically would need @Warchamp7 to approve.

Author: ~~It's about the JSON file not the UI.~~

Author: It's not in the UI, it's in `rtmp-services`.

> - Services that ask for a protocol or only codecs that are not registered will not be shown.

Reviewer: What is an example of a service that asks for a protocol?

> - `"output"` in `"recommended"` is no longer required (kept for backward compatibility) and `const char *(*get_output_type)(void *data)` in `obs_service_info` will be no longer used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `"output"` field in the `"recommended"` object will be deprecated, but it will be kept for backwards compatibility. `const char *(*get_output_type)(void *data)` in `obs_service_info` will be deprecated.
```

>     - It will be required through the JSON Schema if protocol different from RTMP(S) is set to avoid breakage of the backward compatibility.

Reviewer: Is this describing a validation of "output"? The current valid values of "output" are:
```
rtmp_output
ffmpeg_hls_muxer
ftl_output
ffmpeg_mpegts_muxer
```
If I recall correctly, rtmp_output is currently assumed by OBS to be the default value if a value is not specified.

Reviewer: I don't remember what I was asking here.

- Codecs field for audio and video will be added to enable services to allow some of codec compatible with the protocol.

### Service and Output settings interactions

> NOTE: Since Services API is not usable by third-party for now. The scenario where there is no simple encoder preset for the service does not need to be considered for now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Since Services API is not usable by third-party for now, this RFC will not consider a scenario where there is no simple encoder preset for the service.
```

> Changing protocol by changing the service should update the Output page with only compatible encoders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If changing the service results in the selected protocol changing, the Output page should be updated to list only compatible encoders.
```

> If the actual codec is not supported by the service, the codec will be changed and the user warned about the change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the currently selected codec is not supported by the service, the selected codec will be changed and the user will be notified about the change.
```

> ## What if there is various registered outputs for one protocol ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What if there are multiple registered outputs for one protocol?
```

> ## What if there is various registered outputs for one protocol ?

Reviewer: Is this referring to values of the `output` item in the `recommended` object of service objects? Or is this referring more generally to outputs?

Author: Output type in general like: what if a third-party plugin add an output that do RTMP.

Reviewer: I think this goes back to my concerns here: https://github.com/obsproject/rfcs/pull/45#discussion_r1132839783

The improbable situation where a plugin register a output for an already registered protocol could happen, so managing this possibility is required.

> - In `obs_service_info`: a `const char *(*get_preferred_output_type)(void *data)` will replace `const char *(*get_output_type)(void *data)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In `obs_service_info`, a `const char *(*get_preferred_output_type)(void *data)` will replace `const char *(*get_output_type)(void *data)`.
```

> - In `obs_service_info`: a `const char *(*get_preferred_output_type)(void *data)` will replace `const char *(*get_output_type)(void *data)`.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we can outright replace `get_output_type`, or if we need to deprecate the current one and add the new one.

Author: I rewrote this part.

> - A function in the UI to preffer first-party outputs will be considered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A function in the UI to prefer first-party outputs will be considered.
```

# Summary
- Define supported protocols for services and outputs in libobs and OBS Studio
- Outputs for streaming are registered with one or more compatible protocols and codecs
- Only codecs compatible with the output and the service are shown
- Audio codec can be chosen if various compatible, codec in simple mode and encoder advanced output mode.
- Will be extended with RFC 39

# Motivation
Create a better management of outputs, encoders, and services with an approach focused on protocols.

# Design

## Outputs API
Only outputs with the `OBS_OUTPUT_SERVICE` flag are concerned.

Adding to `obs_output_info`:
- `const char *protocols`: protocols separated with a semi-colon (ex: `"RTMP;RTMPS"`), required to register the output. The string used to identify the protocol must be its officialy/widely used acronym, those acronyms are usually uppercased.

Adding to this API these functions:
- `const char *obs_output_get_protocols(const obs_output_t *output)`: returns protocols supported by the output.
- `bool obs_is_output_protocol_registered(const char *protocol)`: return true if an output with the protocol is registered.

> - `bool obs_enum_output_service_types(const char *protocol, size_t idx, const char **id)`: enumerate all outputs types compatible with the given protocol.

Reviewer 2: Judging by the description and implementation, there is no relevance to services in this function. Perhaps `obs_enum_outputs_with_protocol()` would serve as a better name?

Reviewer 2: Or `obs_enum_output_types_with_protocol()`

Author: Changed.

- `bool obs_enum_output_protocols(size_t idx, const char **protocol)`: enumerate all registered protocol.
- `const char *obs_get_output_supported_video_codecs(const char *id)`: return compatible video codecs of the given output id.
- `const char *obs_get_output_supported_audio_codecs(const char *id)`: return compatible audio codecs of the given output id.

## Services API
Since a streaming service may not accept all the codecs usable by a protocol, adding a way to set supported codecs is required.

Adding to `obs_service_info`:

> - `const char *(*get_protocol)(void *data)`: return the protocol used by the service. RFC 39 will allow multi-protocol services in the future.

Reviewer 2: With the intention of multiple supported protocols for a service in the future, it might make sense to call this `get_preferred_protocol`

Author: This is only to meant to indicate which protocol the service is actually using.
The word `preferred` has nothing to do there.

Reviewer 3: In that case, `get_active_protocol` maybe?

Adding to this API these functions:
- `const char *obs_service_get_protocol(const obs_service_t *service)`: return the protocol used by the service.
- `const char **obs_service_get_supported_video_codecs(const obs_service_t *service)`: return video codecs compatible with the service.
- `const char **obs_service_get_supported_audio_codecs(const obs_service_t *service)`: return audio codecs compatible with the service.

### Services and connection informations

Depending on the protocol, the service object should provide various types of connection details (e.g., server URL, stream key, username, password).

Currently, `get_key` can provide a stream id (SRT) or an encryption passphrase (RIST) rather than a stream key.

Rather than adding a getter for each possible type of information, a getter where we can choose which type of information we want should be implemented.

Types of connection details will be defined by an enum with only even number values. Odd number values will be reserved for potential third-party protocols (RFC 39).

List of types:
```c

> enum obs_service_connect_info {

Reviewer 2: Sorry to nitpick, but given that this info is specifically associated with a protocol, perhaps `obs_service_protocol_info` is a more suitable name.

Author: I choose `connect` because this is an information used to connect to the ingest, also it matches the related function.

`protocol` would indicate that it's information about the protocol itself and not the connection to ingest.

Reviewer 2: A reply to allow resolution of this comment

	OBS_SERVICE_CONNECT_INFO_SERVER_URL = 0,
	OBS_SERVICE_CONNECT_INFO_STREAM_KEY = 2,
	OBS_SERVICE_CONNECT_INFO_USERNAME = 4,
	OBS_SERVICE_CONNECT_INFO_PASSWORD = 6,
	OBS_SERVICE_CONNECT_INFO_STREAM_ID = 8,
	OBS_SERVICE_CONNECT_INFO_ENCRYPT_PASSPHRASE = 10,
};
```

Adding to `obs_service_info`:
- `const char *(*get_connect_info)(void *data, uint32_t type)` where `type` is one of the value of the list above indicating which info we want and return `NULL` if it doesn't have it.
- `bool (*can_try_to_connect)(void *data)`, since protocols and services do not always require the same information. This function allows the service to return if it can connect. Return true if the the service has all it needs to connect.

Adding these functions to the Services API:
- `const char *obs_service_get_connect_info(const obs_service_t *service, uint32_t type)`: return the connection information related to the given type (list above).

> - `bool obs_service_can_try_to_connect(const obs_service_t *service)`: return if the service can try to connect.

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: `obs_service_validate_connect_info()` (or `obs_service_validate_protocol_info()`)

Author: The function can be seen as deeply connected to `obs_service_connect_info` but this is not the case.

For example this function can use an API call to the streaming service without even checking any connection info in case of RFC 39 new service integration.

Reviewer 2: A reply to allow resolution of this comment

# Summary
- Define supported protocols for services and outputs in libobs and OBS Studio
- Outputs for streaming are registered with one or more compatible protocols and codecs
- Only codecs compatible with the output and the service are shown
- Audio codec can be chosen if various compatible, the encoder implementation can be chosen in advanced output mode.
- Will be extended with RFC 39

# Motivation
Create a better management of outputs, encoders, and services with an approach focused on protocols.

# Design

## Outputs API
Only outputs with the `OBS_OUTPUT_SERVICE` flag are concerned.

Adding to `obs_output_info`:
- `const char *protocols`: protocols separated with a semi-colon (ex: `"RTMP;RTMPS"`), required to register the output.

> - `const char *protocols_prefixes`: URL protocols prefixes separated with a semi-colon `"rtmp://;rtmps://"`, optional.

Reviewer: In what cases is this optional? In what cases is this not optional?

Author: It's always optional, adding it just allow the protocols to be auto-detected.

Reviewer: Allow me to rephrase. In what cases would one provide prefixes? In what cases would one _not_ provide prefixes?

Author: > In what cases would one provide prefixes?

If the protocol has a unique prefix (e.g. RTMP has `rtmp://`, SRT has `srt://`,…)

> In what cases would one not provide prefixes?

Protocols relying on HTTP will be a common case (e.g. HLS, WHIP) and those technically does not have a prefix.

I made it optional because of those, the prefix shall to be unique to the protocol.

Reviewer: For posterity... As explained off-thread, in my opinion, outputs and services should be able to specify all relevant information about them. It is up to the consumer of that information to decide how to act on that information. For example, if we determine that there are multiple outputs that all use the same protocol prefix, then we should not automatically provide whatever convenience functionality we would if the protocol prefix were unique to all registered outputs. We (and other obs_output_info creators) should not have to be careful with specifying obs_output_info to ensure that protocols_prefixes are unique. The consumer of that data should determine if a given protocol prefix is unique and can be safely mapped to a single protocol or obs_output_info.

In that line of thinking, all obs_output_info objects should always fully specify their `protocols` and `protocols_prefixes`, and OBS (whether in obs-outputs or somewhere else) should figure out if it is safe to provide convenience functionality based on uniqueness (i.e., auto-detecting the protocol based on the prefix and adjusting the UI accordingly) or if it must provide a different user experience 

I don't know if this is something we can, or should, address now in this RFC, or if this is something that can easily be addressed later on. cc @PatTheMav who might be able to better explain this point.

Reviewer: Following further off-thread discussion, the `protocols_prefixes` items were removed from the RFC and related PRs. Resolving.

  - Only one prefix per protocol in `protocols`.
  - Those prefixes should be in the same order as `protocols`.
  - Meant to be used for protocol auto-detection.
  - While registering if present, the number of prefix shall be less or equal to the number of protocols.
  - NOTE: Prefixes (URI scheme + `://`) are prefered over URI schemes to avoid:

>     - matching links without schemes (e.g. "rtmp.example.com").

Reviewer: Matching with what mechanism? The only URLs in services.json that have no schemes are the Glimesh FTL servers. Every other entry provides a scheme. Incidentally, our `ftl_output` implementation checks if the provided URL begins with `ftl://`, and if so, creates the ingest_url without it only because the ftl-sdk seemingly requires it. We could add `ftl://` to all the existing Glimesh FTL ingest URLs and they would still work.

Our current `ffmpeg_mpegts_muxer` implementation checks ingest URLs for just schemes without checking for `://`. This is probably a little unsafe, but we do not expect users to put malformed URLs in the server field for Custom Servers.

As an aside, all URIs require a non-empty scheme. URIs that have an `authority` component (typically domain name or IP address) require `//`. Only URIs that do not have that component lack `//`. All _URLs_ follow `scheme` with `://`.

I may need some time to think about this overall.

Reviewer: This is probably an implementation detail that does not need to be addressed here.

    - adding `://` each time that a auto-detection is done.

> 

Reviewer: Remove two blank lines.

> Adding to the API these functions:

Reviewer: What API? Where? Do you mean the libobs API (obs.h)? Please be specific.

Author: ```md
## Outputs API
```

We are in the Outputs API scope.

- `const char *obs_output_get_protocols(const obs_output_t *output)`: returns protocols supported by the output.
- `bool obs_output_is_protocol_registered(const char *protocol)`: return true if an output with the protocol is registered.
- `const char *obs_output_get_prefix_protocol(const char *prefix)`: return the protocol bound to the prefix.
- `bool obs_enum_output_service_types(const char *protocol, size_t idx, const char **id)`: enumerate all outputs types compatible with the given protocol.
- `bool obs_enum_output_protocols_prefixes(size_t idx, const char **prefix)`: enumerate all registered URL prefixes.
- `bool obs_enum_output_protocols(size_t idx, const char **prefix)`: enumerate all registered protocol.
- `const char *obs_get_output_supported_video_codecs(const char *id)`: return compatible video codecs of the given output id.
- `const char *obs_get_output_supported_audio_codecs(const char *id)`: return compatible audio codecs of the given output id.

### About protocols

> RTMP and RTMPS will only be compatible only with H264 and AAC.

Reviewer: Isn't this already established by the current `rtmp_output`? It sounds like this is describing as an example rather than acting as a specification.
https://github.com/obsproject/obs-studio/blob/29.0.0/plugins/obs-outputs/rtmp-stream.c#L1634-L1635

Author: "About protocols" got rewritten with only information about HLS and FTL.

> HLS will have no prefix, HLS relies on HTTP/HTTPS and it is not the only one in this case. Since it has no prefix, HLS is not be auto-detectable in the custom field.

Reviewer: This violates the line from the earlier:
> - Only one prefix per protocol in `protocols`.

If a protocol can specify zero prefixes, then the above line would need reworded to indicate this with language such as "up to one prefix per protocol" or "zero or one prefixes per protocol".

Can we explicitly specify that HLS uses HTTP(S)? Can we just not auto-select an output type if we multiple output types use the same protocol prefix?

Author: Wording changed.

Added a note, that allowing the user to choose a protocol for a custom server is part of the RFC 39.

HLS, SRT, and RIST are codec agnostic since they use MPEG/TS container but require some set up depending on the codec.

FTL will only be compatible only with H264 and Opus because of the deprecation of the protocol in OBS Studio.

## Services API
Since a streaming service may not accept all the codecs usable by a protocol, adding a way to set supported codecs is required.

Adding to `obs_service_info`:
- `const char *(*get_protocol)(void *data)`: return the protocol used by the service. RFC 39 will allow multi-protocol services in the future.
- `const char **(*get_supported_video_codecs)(void *data)`: video codecs supported by the service. Optional, fallback to protocol supported codecs if not set.
- `const char **(*get_supported_audio_codecs)(void *data)`: audio codecs supported by the service. Optional, fallback to protocol supported codecs if not set.

> Adding to the API these functions:

Reviewer: What API? Where? Do you mean the libobs API (obs.h)? Please be specific.

Author: ```md
## Services API
```

We are in the Services API scope.

- `const char *obs_service_get_protocol(const obs_service_t *service)`: return the protocol used by the service.
- `obs_service_get_supported_video_codecs(const obs_service_t *service)`: return video codecs compatible with the service.

> - `obs_service_get_supported_audio_codecs(const obs_service_t *service)`: return audio codecs compatible with the service.

Reviewer: What is the return type for these functions?

> ### Services and information

Reviewer: Perhaps "connection information".

> Depending on the protocol, the service should provide various types of connection details (e.g. server URL, stream key, username, password).

Reviewer: By "the service" do you mean the "service object"?

Currently, `get_key` can provide a stream id (SRT) or an encryption passphrase (RIST) rather than a stream key.

Rather than adding a getter for each possible type of information, a getter where we can choose which type of information we want should be implemented.

> Each types of connection details will be define by a macro with an even number, odd number will be reserved for potential third-party protocol (RFC 39).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each type of connection details will be defined by a macro with an even number value. Odd number values will be reserved for potential third-party protocols (RFC 39).
```

List of types:
```c
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_SERVER_URL 0
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_STREAM_KEY 2
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_USERNAME 4 
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_PASSWORD 6
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_STREAM_ID 8
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_ENCRYPT_PASSPHRASE 10
```

Adding to `obs_service_info`:
- `const char *(*get_connect_info)(uint32_t type, void *data)` where `type` is one of the value of the list above indicating which info we want and return `NULL` if it doesn't have it.

> - `bool (*can_try_to_connect)(void *data)`, since protocols and services do not always require the same informations. This function allows the service to return if it can connect. Return true if the the service has all it needs to connect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `bool (*can_try_to_connect)(void *data)`, since protocols and services do not always require the same information. This function allows the service to return if it can connect. Return true if the service has all it needs to connect.
```

Author: I really mean information in plural.

Reviewer: "information" is both plural and singular. There is no distinct plural form of "information" in English, at least not one that is commonly accepted or used.

> Adding to the API these functions:

Reviewer: What API? Where? Do you mean the libobs API (obs.h)? Please be specific.

Author: ```md
## Services API
```

We still in the Services API scope.

Reviewer: The reader or implementer should not have to remember what section they are in. At minimum, this should say, "this API" to be less ambiguous than "the API". Even better would be to say, "Add these functions to the Services API:".

- `const char *obs_service_get_connect_info(uint32_t type, const obs_service_t *service)`: return the connection information related to the given type (list above).
- `bool obs_service_can_try_to_connect(const obs_service_t *service)`: return if the service can try to connect.
  - return `bool (*can_try_to_connect)(void *data)` result.
  - return true if `bool (*can_try_to_connect)(void *data)` is not implemented in the service.

>   - return false if the service object is invalid.

Reviewer: Define "invalid". Does this mean NULL? Or does it mean that the `service` object is lacking certain information? Or is there some other validation method?

`obs_service_get_url()`, `obs_service_get_key()`, `obs_service_get_username()`, and `obs_service_get_password()` will be deprecated in favor of `obs_service_get_connect_info()`.

In the future, if we want to support a protocol that doesn't use a server URL, this scenario is covered by this design.

### About `rtmp-services`

> `rtmp-services` is plugin that provides two services `rtmp_common` and `rtmp_custom`. The use of "rtmp" in the naming no longer means that it only supports RTMP, it was and is kept to avoid breakage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`rtmp-services` is a plugin that provides two services `rtmp_common` and `rtmp_custom`. The use of "rtmp" in the naming no longer means that it only supports RTMP, it was and is kept to avoid breakage.
```

> `rtmp-services` is plugin that provides two services `rtmp_common` and `rtmp_custom`. The use of "rtmp" in the naming no longer means that it only supports RTMP, it was and is kept to avoid breakage.

Reviewer: > The use of "rtmp" in the naming no longer means that it only supports RTMP, it was and is kept to avoid breakage.

Based on the wording, I cannot tell if this is referring to "rtmp-services" or "rtmp_common" and "rtmp_custom".

Author: "rtmp_common" and "rtmp_custom" mostly, so "rtmp-services" plugin in general.
RFC 39 plans to replace it.

Reviewer: It was mostly a question of if:
> The use of "rtmp" in the naming

applies to just "rtmp-services" or also to "rmtp_common" and "rtmp_custom". I just wanted that clarified in the wording.

Reviewer: Resolved with updated wording:
> `rtmp-services` is a plugin that provides two services `rtmp_common` and `rtmp_custom`. The use of "rtmp" in these three terms no longer means that it only supports RTMP, it was and is kept to avoid breakage.

This plugin will:
- for `rtmp_common` services will to at least support H264 as video codec, AAC or Opus as audio codec. This is a limitation required by the simple output mode.
- for `rtmp_custom` it will depends on the auto-detected protocol.

#### About service JSON file

- For `services` objects, a `"protocol"` field will be added. This will be used to indicate the protocol for services that use HLS or FTL. Other protocols can be detected through prefixes. Further changes will be done in RFC 39.

>   - `services` objects are mono-protocol, services with no `"protocol"` field that provides RTMP and RTMPS servers are the only exceptions.

Reviewer: If a service can have no protocol, then it is not accurate to call them mono-protocol.

Author: Re-worded.

>   - RTMP services with custom code and HTTP(S) URLs will have the protocol enforced to RTMP.

Reviewer: I cannot tell if this means "services that use RTMP but have HTTP(S) URLs" or "rtmp-services services.json entries with Service Integrations".

Author: Re-worded too.

- Services that use a protocol that is not registered will not be shown. e.g. OBS Studio without RTMPS support will not show services and servers that rely on RTMPS.
- Codecs field for audio and video will be added to allow services to limit which codec is compatible with the service.
- `"output"` field in the `"recommended"` object will be deprecated, but it will be kept for backward compatibility. `const char *(*get_output_type)(void *data)` in `obs_service_info` will be no longer used by `rtmp-services`.

>   - The JSON schema will be improved to require the `"protocol"`field when the protocol is not auto-detectable. The same for the `"output"` field to keep backward compatibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The JSON schema will be modified to require the `"protocol"` field when the protocol is not auto-detectable. The same for the `"output"` field to keep backward compatibility.
```

## UI

### Audio encoders

> If the service/output is compatible with various audio codecs, the user should be able to choose in the UI which one:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the service/output is compatible with more than one audio codec, the user should be able to choose in the UI which one:
```

- In simple mode, the user will be able to chose the codec (AAC or Opus).

> - In advanced mode, the user will be able to chose a specific encoder.

Reviewer: chose -> choose

# Summary
- Define supported protocols for services and outputs in libobs and OBS Studio
- Outputs for streaming are registered with one or more compatible protocols and codecs
- Only codecs compatible with the output and the service are shown
- Audio codec can be chosen if various compatible, codec in simple mode and encoder advanced output mode.
- Will be extended with RFC 39

# Motivation
Create a better management of outputs, encoders, and services with an approach focused on protocols.

# Design

## Outputs API
Only outputs with the `OBS_OUTPUT_SERVICE` flag are concerned.

Adding to `obs_output_info`:
- `const char *protocols`: protocols separated with a semi-colon (ex: `"RTMP;RTMPS"`), required to register the output.
- `const char *protocols_prefixes`: URL protocols prefixes separated with a semi-colon `"rtmp://;rtmps://"`, optional.
  - Up to one URL prefix per protocol in `protocols`.
  - Those URL prefixes must be in the same order as `protocols`.
  - Each URL prefix must be unique to the protocol

>   - Meant to be used for protocol auto-detection on server URL.

Reviewer: Is auto-detection used for services in services.json, or is auto-detection _only_ used for user-specified Custom Server URLs?

Author: Both.

Adding to this API these functions:
- `const char *obs_output_get_protocols(const obs_output_t *output)`: returns protocols supported by the output.
- `bool obs_output_is_protocol_registered(const char *protocol)`: return true if an output with the protocol is registered.
- `const char *obs_output_get_prefix_protocol(const char *prefix)`: return the protocol bound to the prefix.
- `bool obs_enum_output_service_types(const char *protocol, size_t idx, const char **id)`: enumerate all outputs types compatible with the given protocol.
- `bool obs_enum_output_protocols_prefixes(size_t idx, const char **prefix)`: enumerate all registered URL prefixes.
- `bool obs_enum_output_protocols(size_t idx, const char **prefix)`: enumerate all registered protocol.
- `const char *obs_get_output_supported_video_codecs(const char *id)`: return compatible video codecs of the given output id.
- `const char *obs_get_output_supported_audio_codecs(const char *id)`: return compatible audio codecs of the given output id.

### About protocols

- HLS relies on HTTP/HTTPS and it is not the only existing protocol in this case. This protocol has no unique URL prefixes.

> - Because of the deprecation of the protocol, FTL will not have a URL prefix asign to its output to not make it available through custom server in the UI.

Reviewer: If I'm understanding this correctly, this would be a breaking change, since we currently support FTL URLs in Custom Server in the UI. See https://github.com/obsproject/obs-studio/commit/96ef45cef5baae3bf01fbb22051d6da4ee6ceae1.

Reviewer 4: @RytoEX FTL is being deprecated/removed I believe? WebRTC satisfies all the needs of FTL (latency/easy to bridge with other RTP protocols)

If this RFC doesn’t support FTL will we have to merge WebRTC first? Or this RFC needs to support FTL.

Reviewer: Per https://github.com/obsproject/obs-studio/discussions/4021:
> After 9 months of WebRTC support being available in OBS, we plan to remove FTL support (all code using FTL and all services entries for FTL ingests) from the OBS codebase, meaning the first major or minor OBS release that comes 9 months after WebRTC release will not support FTL.

That does not mean we should disable existing functionality in the lead up or interim. Otherwise, the project needs to come to a consensus on a policy shift counter to the published proposal.

Author: I forgot this part of the code, will restore FTL prefix then.

Author: > If this RFC doesn’t support FTL will we have to merge WebRTC first? Or this RFC needs to support FTL.

It does support it, I just thought it was not the case in "Custom…" which is the case. I need to redo this part.

## Services API
Since a streaming service may not accept all the codecs usable by a protocol, adding a way to set supported codecs is required.

Adding to `obs_service_info`:

> - `const char *(*get_protocol)(void *data)`: return the protocol used by the service. RFC 39 will allow multi-protocol services in the future.

Reviewer: Does this mean that this struct will have a permanent and defunct member after RFC 39?

Author: No this is a function pointer, it allows the service to not have a fixed protocol.

If would be fixed if it was a `const char *` non-function pointer.

Reviewer: Got it. Thanks.

- `const char **(*get_supported_video_codecs)(void *data)`: video codecs supported by the service. Optional, fallback to protocol supported codecs if not set.
- `const char **(*get_supported_audio_codecs)(void *data)`: audio codecs supported by the service. Optional, fallback to protocol supported codecs if not set.

Adding to this API these functions:
- `const char *obs_service_get_protocol(const obs_service_t *service)`: return the protocol used by the service.
- `const char **obs_service_get_supported_video_codecs(const obs_service_t *service)`: return video codecs compatible with the service.

> - `const char **obs_service_get_supported_audio_codecs(const obs_service_t *service)`: return audio codecs compatible with the service.

Reviewer 4: @tytan652 Audio/Video codecs aren't know ahead of time for WebRTC. The offerer sends a list of all supported codecs, and the answerer returns the intersection.

The use case I think is important is `OBS -> Browser`. Users will be able to stream directly to a friend with no server/backend required. We can't configure ahead of time what codecs are going to work.

Could codec determination be made later then service/protocol registration?

Author: If the streaming service does not put a list of compatible codec in the services JSON, it will allow any codec that is set in the output. But the service **must** support at least H264 and AAC or opus.

If it is a "Custom server", then it will allow any codec that is set in the output. But in this scenario the user is by himself.

> The offered sends a list of all supported codecs, and the answerer returns the intersection.

The user only set one encoder (e.g. NVENC H264, AOM AV1… ) in the settings, only codecs supported by the service and the outputs are shown in the settings UI.

The user (auto-wizard) decides which encoder (one codec) it uses, the UI and the output **must** follow user settings.

This is not part of the RFC, this is how OBS Studio actually works with a hard-coded codecs list.
The RFC just plan to replace the list with service and output supported codecs.

> Could codec determination be made later then service/protocol registration?

It could be done while calling `obs_service_get_supported_`video/audio`_codecs()` in services `get_supported_`video/audio`_codecs`.

But output codecs are fixed.

Reviewer 4: @tytan652 mind unresolving my comment, I don't believe it has been addressed?

The goal of this RFC is `Create a better management of outputs, encoders, and services with an approach focused on protocols.`. If we don't address use cases we know about another RFC + refactor will be required. 

So I don't believe the current design satisfies the goals of the RFC.

`obs_service_get_supported_video` I don't believe is the right API. The available codecs will change for every connection. The remote host doesn't have a static list of codecs they support.

Author: Without (or with) the RFC, the output does not (and will not) negotiate the codec when starting the stream/connection and suddenly change the encoder.
The output uses the encoder it was given and works with it or fails, nothing else.

- The service beside "Custom…" must provide its supported codecs in the JSON if it does not support all the one that the output could support. And the user is unable to choose unsupported codecs in the settings.
- If "Custom…", it falls back to what the output support, the user should know which codec/encoder should work. And if it this not supported while connecting, it fails.

### Services and connection informations

Depending on the protocol, the service object should provide various types of connection details (e.g. server URL, stream key, username, password).

Currently, `get_key` can provide a stream id (SRT) or an encryption passphrase (RIST) rather than a stream key.

Rather than adding a getter for each possible type of information, a getter where we can choose which type of information we want should be implemented.

Each type of connection details will be defined by a macro with an even number value. Odd number values will be reserved for potential third-party protocols (RFC 39).

List of types:
```c
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_SERVER_URL 0
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_STREAM_KEY 2
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_USERNAME 4 
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_PASSWORD 6
#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_STREAM_ID 8

> #define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_ENCRYPT_PASSPHRASE 10

Reviewer 4: Can we get `#define OBS_SERVICE_INFO_BEARER_TOKEN 12` for WebRTC?

Author: Currently, OBS Studio only supports RTMP(S), FTL (deprecated), HLS, SRT, RIST.

  - The services is RTMP but has a HTTP url as its server URL have custom code in the plugin will have the protocol field enforced to RTMP.
- Services that use a protocol that is not registered will not be shown. e.g. OBS Studio without RTMPS support will not show services and servers that rely on RTMPS.
- Codecs field for audio and video will be added to allow services to limit which codec is compatible with the service.
- `"output"` field in the `"recommended"` object will be deprecated, but it will be kept for backward compatibility. `const char *(*get_output_type)(void *data)` in `obs_service_info` will be no longer used by `rtmp-services`.
  - The JSON schema will be modified to require the `"protocol"`field when the protocol is not auto-detectable. The same for the `"output"` field to keep backward compatibility.

## UI

### Custom server protocol auto-detection

The user can set a custom server through the service "Custom…", the protocol will be deduced based on URL prefixes from service outputs and default to RTMP if no matches.

NOTE: Allowing the user to manually choose the protocol (e.g. HLS) is part of RFC 39.

### Audio encoders

> If the service/output is compatible with more than one audio codec, the user should be able to choose in the UI which one:

Reviewer 4: As a user could I set my preference order? `AV1 -> H265 -> H264`. After the session is negotiated OBS takes the best one possible.

Will this also be influenced by the remote and its feature capability
* If remote supports SVC use `X`
* If remote supports Simulcast use `Y`

Author: The user only set one encoder (e.g. NVENC H264, AOM AV1… ) in the settings, only codecs supported by the service and the outputs are shown in the settings UI.

The user (auto-wizard) decides which encoder (one codec) it uses, the UI and the output **must** follow user settings.

This is not part of the RFC, this is how OBS Studio actually works with a hard-coded codecs list.
The RFC just plan to replace the list with service and output supported codecs.

# Design

## Outputs API
Only outputs with the `OBS_OUTPUT_SERVICE` flag are concerned.

Adding to `obs_output_info`:
- `const char *protocols`: protocols separated with a semi-colon (ex: `"RTMP;RTMPS"`), required to register the output.
- `const char *protocols_prefixes`: URL protocols prefixes separated with a semi-colon `"rtmp://;rtmps://"`, optional.
  - Up to one URL prefix per protocol in `protocols`.
  - Those URL prefixes must be in the same order as `protocols`.
  - Each URL prefix must be unique to the protocol
  - Meant to be used for protocol auto-detection on server URL.
  - While registering if present, the number of URL prefix must be less or equal to the number of protocols.
  - NOTE: This field is optional because not every protocol has a unique prefix.
  - NOTE 2: URL prefixes (URI scheme + `://`) are prefered over URI schemes to avoid:
    - matching links without prefixes (e.g., "rtmp.example.com").
    - adding `://` each time that a auto-detection is done.

Adding to this API these functions:
- `const char *obs_output_get_protocols(const obs_output_t *output)`: returns protocols supported by the output.

> - `bool obs_output_is_protocol_registered(const char *protocol)`: return true if an output with the protocol is registered.

Reviewer 5: Could you explain (preferably with an example) why such a function is useful ? Seems to me that internal plugins won't ever use an unimplemented protocol. Regarding third-party plugins (for a service for example), why would they use an unimplemented protocol ? If for instance a plugin 1 (like obs-ndi) is required by plugin 2, it's up to plugin 2 to make sure plugin 1 is installed.

Author: It may happen with internal plugins, we might support in the future protocol that rely on library that are not on LTS Linux distro so the protocol will disabled on those.

> Regarding third-party plugins (for a service for example), why would they use an unimplemented protocol ?

This requires RFC 39, for the same reason about future protocol or because the service might support a protocol that comes from another plugin.

> If for instance a plugin 1 (like obs-ndi) is required by plugin 2, it's up to plugin 2 to make sure plugin 1 is installed.

It's impossible while loading plugins, plugin 2 can be loaded before plugin 1. And so even if plugin 1 is there, plugin 2 can't see it is.

---

This function just enables improving UI/UX, not showing services or not listing protocol in services property view that will not work, by asking to the API if there is a registered output that support this protocol.

Reviewer 5: thanks for the clarifications

- `bool obs_service_can_try_to_connect(const obs_service_t *service)`: return if the service can try to connect.
  - return `bool (*can_try_to_connect)(void *data)` result.
  - return true if `bool (*can_try_to_connect)(void *data)` is not implemented in the service.
  - return false if the service object is `NULL`.

`obs_service_get_url()`, `obs_service_get_key()`, `obs_service_get_username()`, and `obs_service_get_password()` will be deprecated in favor of `obs_service_get_connect_info()`.

In the future, if we want to support a protocol that doesn't use a server URL, this scenario is covered by this design.

### About `rtmp-services`

`rtmp-services` is a plugin that provides two services `rtmp_common` and `rtmp_custom`. The use of "rtmp" in these three terms no longer means that it only supports RTMP, it was and is kept to avoid breakage.

- In `rtmp_common`, services must at least support H264 as video codec and AAC or Opus as audio codec. This is a limitation required by the simple output mode.
- The service `rtmp_custom` will depend on protocol prefixes from outputs types to detect which protocol is in use.

#### About service JSON file

> - For `services` objects, a `"protocol"` field will be added. This will be used to indicate the protocol for services in situation where:

Reviewer: > in situation where:

Is this "exactly one of these is true" or "one or more of these is true"?

Author: Is my change good ?

Reviewer: Yes. Thanks.

>   - The protocol can not be deduced from servers URL prefix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The protocol can not be deduced from server's URL prefix.
```

>   - The services is RTMP but has a HTTP url as its server URL have custom code in the plugin will have the protocol field enforced to RTMP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The service is RTMP but has an HTTP URL as its server URL have custom code in the plugin will have the protocol field enforced to RTMP.
```

I don't understand how the second half of the sentence ties into the first.

Author: Tried to improve it.

>   - The service is RTMP but has an HTTP URL as its server URL and it has custom code to request the true server URL through an API in the plugin. In this case the protocol will be enforced to the right protocol.

Reviewer: Perhaps add context by simply mentioning Dacast and YouNow so that someone can go look at a concrete example if this wording is confusing.

Author: Is my change good ?

Reviewer: Yes. Thanks.

> - Services that use a protocol that is not registered will not be shown. e.g. OBS Studio without RTMPS support will not show services and servers that rely on RTMPS.

Reviewer: Instead of starting a full sentence with "e.g.", I would just say "For example, ".

- Codecs field for audio and video will be added to allow services to limit which codec is compatible with the service.

> - `"output"` field in the `"recommended"` object will be deprecated, but it will be kept for backward compatibility. `const char *(*get_output_type)(void *data)` in `obs_service_info` will be no longer used by `rtmp-services`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `"output"` field in the `"recommended"` object will be deprecated, but it will be kept for backward compatibility. `const char *(*get_output_type)(void *data)` in `obs_service_info` will no longer be used by `rtmp-services`.
```

>   - The JSON schema will be modified to require the `"protocol"`field when the protocol is not auto-detectable. The same for the `"output"` field to keep backward compatibility.

Reviewer: Nit: need a space between "`"protocol"`" and "field".

## UI

### Custom server protocol auto-detection

The user can set a custom server through the service "Custom…", the protocol will be deduced based on URL prefixes from service outputs and default to RTMP if no matches.

> NOTE: Allowing the user to manually choose the protocol (e.g. HLS) is part of RFC 39.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Allowing the user to manually choose the protocol (e.g., HLS) is part of RFC 39.
```

### Audio encoders

If the service/output is compatible with more than one audio codec, the user should be able to choose in the UI which one:
- In simple mode, the user will be able to choose the codec (AAC or Opus).
- In advanced mode, the user will be able to choose a specific encoder.

### Settings loading order

Service settings need to be loaded first and output ones afterward to show only compatible encoder.

### Service and Output settings interactions

NOTE: Since Services API is not usable by third-party for now, this RFC will not consider a scenario where there is no simple encoder preset for the service.

If changing the service results in the selected protocol changing, the Output page should be updated to list only compatible encoders.

If the currently selected encoder (codec) is not supported by the service, the encoder will be changed and the user will be notified about the change.

> ## What if there are various registered outputs for one protocol ?

Reviewer: Nit: extra space before question mark.

RTMP and RTMPS will on be considered compatible only with H264 and AAC.

HLS will have no prefix set and not "auto-detectable".

HLS, SRT and RIST are codec agnostic, since they use MPEG/TS container.

FTL will be considered compatible only with H264 and opus because of the deprecation of the protocol in OBS Studio.

## Services API
Since a streaming service may not accept all the codec usable by a protocol, adding a way to set supported codecs is required.

Adding to `obs_service_info`:
- `const char *(*get_protocols)(void *data)`: return the protocol used by the service. It will allow multi-protocol services in the future.
- `const char **(*get_supported_video_codecs)(void *data)`: video codecs supported by the service. Optional, fallback to protocol supported codecs if not set.
- `const char **(*get_supported_audio_codecs)(void *data)`: audio codecs supported by the service. Optional, fallback to protocol supported codecs if not set.

### About `rtmp-services`

This plugin will:
- for `rtmp_common` only accept H264, HEVC for Youtube HLS, AAC and opus for FTL protocol.
- for `rtmp_custom` it will depends on the auto-detected protocol.

## UI

### Audio encoders

> If "Custom..." service is selected, the UI should allow to choose between compatible audio encoders. Just a combobox to choose which defaults to AAC.

Reviewer 5: Allowing other codecs than aac (eyeing opus ...) should in parallel be done with better support in Settings>output>audio since atm only aac bitrates are enumerated.

Author: Maybe I use too few words too describe adding the possibility to choose between AAC and opus when the protocol (and the service) is compatible with both.

Author: I put this one as resolved, feel free to review the new version of this paragraph.

Author: >  better support in Settings>output>audio since atm only aac bitrates are enumerated

I get what you mean now, and yes better support will be (is) implemented.
